# Introduction

Due to temperature and salinity differences density driven currents can occur. Because important water systems such as the drinking water supply and large coastal water systems in the Netherlands are strongly influenced by these currents it is important to understand these phenomena. With the use of D-Flow FM, a software package by Deltares, the mixture of salt- and fresh water can be numerically approximated. However, a side effect of these numerical flow models is the occurrence of numerical diffusion and dispersion caused by characteristics of the numerical discretization scheme that is used and the type of flow that is modelled.

Numerical diffusion is sometimes referred to as "numerical viscosity" since the associated approximation errors mimic the effect of an increase in viscosity, i.e. the solution is overdamped. Besides, numerical dispersion is related to unrealistic oscillations in an approximation of an advection-diffusion problem that may occur if stability of the solution is not ensured or if the observed phenomena are not smooth enough for the discretized solutions of the problem posed. Because avoiding such errors requires contrasting measures within the numerical model a quantification of their responses to certain modelling parameters is desirable. [@zijlema_computational_2015; @obrien_study_1950]

To be able to refer the sensitivity of numerical errors produced by D-Flow FM to specific settings and parameters of the model a lock-exchange experiment is set up. In a lock-exhange the initial situation consists of a rectangular tank with a free water equally leveled surface, for one half containing a fluid with a higher density than on the other half of the fluid tank, split vertically. In this research the density difference is caused by a salinity difference. At the start of the experiment (t=0) these fluids set in motion and from two wavefronts, a negative and a positive as a result of the gravitiational and buoyant forces. The numerical errors produced during such an experiment have often been investigated and this research aims to use the results obtained from this experiment as a measure for the order of accuracy of the D-Flow FM numerical flow model. 

Firstly, in modelling flow and transport phenomena, and numerical modelling in general, two variables have a major effect on the stability and accuracy of the solution; the spatial resolution and time step size. Additionally there are many different other numerical and flow related parameters in D-Flow FM that can be set and might have influence on the numerical errors produced. These will all be varied within relevant ranges during four stages of the simulation phase of this research; temporal variations, variations in spatial resolution, variations in the initial salinity difference and variations of other numerical parameters. Secondly, with respect to the lock-exchange experiment three characteristic variables are distinguished; the frontal wavespeed, the thickness of the mixing layer and the waterlevel. The goal of this research is thus to relate the numerical dispersion and -diffusion observed in the output of these characteristic lock-exchange variables to the change of the temporal and spatial resolution, the forcing and other numerical parameters of D-Flow FM. 

To this end a sensitivity analysis per parameter is performed, where the sensitivity S of a parameter P is defined as the relative change of a state variable per change of this parameter: S = (δx/x)/(δP/P). State variables are defined as the numerical dispersion and -diffusion observed in the output of the characteristic variables of the lock-exchange experiment. To quantify the errors of interest first the observed results will be normalized to the varying parameter and plotted against the observed errors. For example to quantify the errors observed while varying the resolution in x-, y- and z-direction the ratio of the cell-lenght, -width and -height will be considered to enable computation times to stay relatively similar. Hereafter they may be related to certain indicator parameters such as the Froude and Reynolds numbers at characteristic locations of the lock-exchange experiment. Finally, available and possibly relevant indicator parameters are the amount of times a cell was Courant limiting, the computed Richardson numbers and other numerical conditions. Depending on the parameters' relevance to each they are proposed to serve as an explanation for the observed errors. Subsequently the observed data is analyzed and compared to results found in different in order to verify and explain the computed results. 

This document describes the research questions and hypotheses in the second chapter, subsequently it will provide some background information related to the lock-exchange, to modelling of flow and transport in general and to D-Flow Flexible Mesh in chapter three. Then, in chapter four the method used to test the hypotheses is presented. The model used as a constant basis throughout the parameter variations is discussed in chapter 5. Finally the results are presented in chapter six and further discussed in chapter 7.
